                                                                  Denali Commission
                                                                  Office of Inspector General
                                                                  Anchorage, AK 99501



April 28, 2015

MEMORANDUM FOR:                Joel Neimeyer
                               Federal Co-Chair, Denali Commission

FROM:                          David Sheppard
                               Acting Inspector General

SUBJECT:                       Need for EEO Services

The Denali Commission has no outlet for employees to currently file EEO complaints.
According to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the first step in an EEO
(equal employment opportunity) complaint process is for the employee to contact an EEO
counselor at his or her agency. Generally this must be done within 45 days of the alleged
discriminatory action. If the dispute is not settled during counseling or alternative dispute
resolution (ADR), in order to advance the employee must file a formal discrimination
complaint within 15 days of the day the EEO counselor provides notice on filing
procedures. The Denali Commission does not have an equal employment opportunity
(EEO) counselor, so is unable to provide its employees with an avenue to raise issues of
discrimination.

The informal EEO counseling process provides an opportunity to define the complainant’s
concerns, obtain information necessary to address the issues, and attempt to resolve the
issues informally. Because the Commission does not have this counseling service
available, staff are unable to obtain the needed informal counseling or alternative dispute
resolution prior to filing a formal complaint. The Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission notes that “not only does ADR provide a Win-Win resolution for the parties,
but it also usually costs less and uses fewer resources than traditional administrative or
adjudicative processes.”

The Commission is required by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.102 to, among other things, “establish or
make available an alternative dispute resolution program. Such program must be available
for both the pre-complaint process and the formal complaint process.” It also requires the
agency “publicize to all employees and post at all times the names, business telephone
numbers and business addresses of the EEO Counselors . . . a notice of the time limits and
necessity of contacting a Counselor before filing a complaint and the telephone numbers
and addresses of the EEO Director, EEO Officer(s) and Special Emphasis Program
Managers.”

We recommend that the Denali Commission work quickly to rectify this situation by
determining what its EEO related agency requirements are and ensuring the agency is
compliant. This should include obtaining the services of an EEO counselor to provide the
full range of required services to Commission employees.
As this memorandum is a follow-up to our earlier discussion on the matter where we were
able to agree on the Commission’s need for these services, I request that you please
provide your written response within 15 days, instead of the normal 30-day response
period.

cc:    Denali Commissioners
       Todd Zinser, Inspector General, U.S. Department of Commerce
       John Whittington, General Counsel, Denali Commission
