August 18, 2014

The Honorable Charles E. Grassley
Ranking Member
Committee on Finance
U.S. Senate
219 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510

The Honorable Tom Coburn
Ranking Member
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs,
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
United States Senate
340 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, DC 20510

Dear Senators Grassley and Coburn:

This letter is in response to your April 8, 2010, request for information and follow-up request
dated July 31, 2014. As you may be aware, the Department of Commerce Office of Inspector
General (OIG) entered into an agreement with the Denali Commission on May 28, 2014, to
provide a full range of inspector general (IG) services. We were recently informed by a member of
Senator Coburn’s staff that the April 8, 2010 request has not yet been answered by the former
Denali Commission IG. We have been reviewing the records of the former IG in an attempt to
answer your request.

Based on our review of the records we were able to retrieve, we found no evidence of instances
since October 1, 2008, of Commissioners or Commission staff resisting or objecting to Denali
OIG oversight in a significant manner. OIGs operate in environments where a certain tension
inherently exists between them and the agencies they oversee; there were definitely tensions
between the Commission and the former IG. The former IG also believed that the Dodd-Frank
Act, which clarified that the agency head for the Commission consisted of not only the federal co-
chair but included each Commissioner, impaired his ability to obtain necessary cooperation from
the Denali Commission staff. However, we do not share this concern at this time.

We have not been able to find a response from the former IG to the House Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform on unimplemented recommendations. However, we were
able to find some handwritten notes that suggested there were 17 unimplemented
recommendations since 2009. We are working with the Denali Commission staff to determine the
current status of those recommendations, listed in enclosure 1.




                                              1
If you have any questions or require additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me
at (206) 220-7970.

Sincerely,




David Sheppard
Acting Inspector General, Denali Commission

Enclosure

cc: 	   Todd Zinser, Inspector General
        Joel Niemeyer, Federal Co-Chair, Denali Commission




                                         2

	

             Enclosure 1.	Unimplemented Recommendations Since 2009

Report       Date     Unimplemented Recommendations (According to Prior IG)
Inspection
of Togiak
             Sept   Denali should include a grant condition that requires site visits at specified
Family
             2011   intervals from some representative of the involved state department.
Resource
Center
                    When a grant is too small to warrant site visits, Denali should include a
                    grant condition for periodic, informal "walk‐throughs" by a credible local
                    third‐party.
                    As broadband Internet coverage expands across bush Alaska, live
                    walkthroughs with portable webcams may be the best alternative to site
Inspection          visits.
             Sept
of McGrath          Denali should consider convening one of its quarterly meetings in
             2009
City Hall           McGrath to assure that the needs of this remote interior region are
                    considered in the agency's annual statutory work plan. Alternatively, less
                    than a quorum of the commissioners could conduct a public hearing in
                    McGrath concerning the work plan.
                    Denali should include an explicit condition in its grants that the grantee
                    will document the fire marshal's plan approval before construction starts.
                    Denali should consult the Alaska State Troopers prior to funding
                    construction of a rural police station.
                    Denali should consult the state fire marshal prior to funding construction
                    of a rural fire station.
                    Denali should include a grant condition that requires the value of
                    contributed land to be established by an independent real estate
                    appraiser. Denali may wish to follow the approach of other federal
                    agencies and issue a grants management "common rule" in the Code of
                    Federal Regulations.9 Like other agencies, Denali could also issue its own
                    "compliance supplement" with expected steps for a grant's audit under
Inspection
                    OMB Circular A‐133.
of Port
                    Denali should include a grant condition that requires the monitoring
Graham       Sept
                    agency to review contracts that will document major payments to
Police       2009
                    vendors.
and Fire
                    Denali should include a grant condition that requires site visits at specified
Station
                    intervals from some representative of the involved state department.
                    Denali should require that the state's grant administrator, per OMB
                    Circular A‐133 section 400(d), resolve the $119,205 reporting
                    uncertainty discussed above.
                    Denali should include a grant condition that requires the monitoring
                    agency to implement an internal procedure for its annual review of a
                    subawardee's audit report.
                    Denali should include an explicit condition in its grants that the
                    monitoring agency will document the fire marshal's plan approval before
                    construction starts.


                                            3

	

Report       Date      Unimplemented Recommendations (According to Prior IG)
                    Denali should include a grant condition for publicly recording a Notice of
                    Federal Interest in the land records for a funded facility. This notice
                    should define the parameters of permissible use over time—and the
                    solution for an unneeded, misused, or abandoned building.
                    Denali should thus do an MOU with GSA (the presumed servicer for
                    federal property) to recover the reversionary interest.
Inspection          Denali should request that GSA consult the Colorado attorney general
of                  and assess the extent to which a potential federal claim was compromised
             Oct
Tanacross           by the tribe’s acceptance of the offered settlement.
             2009
Community           In consultation with GSA, Denali should develop a grant condition that
Center              requires immediate notification of any litigation involving a Denali‐funded
                    project. Denali should consider issuing this as part of a grants
                    management “common rule” in the Code of Federal Regulations.




                                           4

